Overhaul the `BASICS` part of the documentation (#50932)
LLNL/spack: lib/spack/docs/configuring_compilers.rst

.. Copyright Spack Project Developers. See COPYRIGHT file for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: (Apache-2.0 OR MIT)

.. _compiler-config:

=====================
Configuring Compilers
=====================

Spack has the ability to build packages with multiple compilers and compiler versions.
Compilers can be made available to Spack by:

1. Specifying them as externals in ``packages.yaml``, or
2. Having them installed in the current Spack store, or

> 3. Having them available as binaries in some buildcache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Having them available as binaries in a buildcache
```

For convenience, Spack will automatically detect compilers as externals the first time it needs them, if no compiler is available.

.. _cmd-spack-compilers:

-----------------------
``spack compiler list``
-----------------------

You can see which compilers are available to Spack by running ``spack compiler list``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack compiler list
   ==> Available compilers
   -- gcc ubuntu20.04-x86_64 ---------------------------------------
   [e]  gcc@10.5.0  [+]  gcc@15.1.0  [+]  gcc@14.3.0

> Compilers marked with an ``[e]`` are available as externals, while those marked with a ``[+]`` are installed in the local Spack's store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compilers marked with an ``[e]`` are system compilers (externals), and those marked with a ``[+]`` have been installed by Spack.
```

Compilers from remote buildcaches are marked as ``-``, but are not shown by default.
To see them you need a specific option:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack compiler list --remote
   ==> Available compilers
   -- gcc ubuntu20.04-x86_64 ---------------------------------------
   [e]  gcc@10.5.0  [+]  gcc@15.1.0  [+]  gcc@14.3.0

   -- gcc ubuntu20.04-x86_64 ---------------------------------------
    -   gcc@12.4.0

> Any of these compilers can be used to build Spack packages.  More on how this is done is in :ref:`sec-specs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any of these compilers can be used to build Spack packages.  More details on how this is done can be found in :ref:`sec-specs`.
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack compiler find /opt/intel/oneapi/compiler/2025.1/bin/
   ==> Added 1 new compiler to /home/user/.spack/packages.yaml
       intel-oneapi-compilers@2025.1.0
   ==> Compilers are defined in the following files:
       /home/user/.spack/packages.yaml

Or you can run ``spack compiler find`` with no arguments to force
auto-detection.  This is useful if you do not know where compilers are
installed, but you know that new compilers have been added to your
``PATH``.  For example, you might load a module, like this:

.. code-block:: console

   $ module load gcc/4.9.0
   $ spack compiler find
   ==> Added 1 new compiler to /home/user/.spack/packages.yaml
       gcc@4.9.0

This loads the environment module for gcc-4.9.0 to add it to
``PATH``, and then it adds the compiler to Spack.

.. note::

   By default, Spack does not fill in the ``modules:`` field in the
   ``packages.yaml`` file.  If you are using a compiler from a
   module, then you should add this field manually.
   See the section on :ref:`compilers-requiring-modules`.

.. _cmd-spack-compiler-info:

-----------------------
``spack compiler info``
-----------------------

> If you want to see additional information of specific compilers, you can run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to see additional information about specific compilers, you can run
```

     prefix: /usr
     compilers:
       c: /usr/bin/gcc-8
       cxx: /usr/bin/g++-8
       fortran: /usr/bin/gfortran-8

   gcc@=9.4.0 languages='c,c++,fortran' arch=linux-ubuntu20.04-x86_64:
     prefix: /usr
     compilers:
       c: /usr/bin/gcc
       cxx: /usr/bin/g++
       fortran: /usr/bin/gfortran

   gcc@=10.5.0 languages='c,c++,fortran' arch=linux-ubuntu20.04-x86_64:
     prefix: /usr
     compilers:
       c: /usr/bin/gcc-10
       cxx: /usr/bin/g++-10
       fortran: /usr/bin/gfortran-10

This shows the details of the compilers that were detected by Spack.
Notice also that we didn't have to be too specific about the version. We just said ``gcc``, and we got information
about all the matching compilers.

------------------------------------------
Manual configuration of external compilers
------------------------------------------

If auto-detection fails, you can manually configure a compiler by editing your ``packages`` configuration.
You can do this by running:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack config edit packages

which will open the file in :ref:`your favorite editor <controlling-the-editor>`.

> Each compiler has an "external" entry in the file with some ``extra_attributes``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each compiler has an "external" entry in the file with ``extra_attributes``:
```

             fortran: /opt/intel/oneapi/compiler/2025.1/bin/ifx
           environment:
             set:
               MKL_ROOT: "/path/to/mkl/root"
             unset: # A list of environment variables to unset
               - CC
             prepend_path: # Similar for append|remove_path
               LD_LIBRARY_PATH: /ld/paths/added/by/setvars/sh

It is also possible to specify additional ``RPATHs`` that the compiler will add to all executables generated by that compiler.
This is useful for forcing certain compilers to RPATH their own runtime libraries so that executables will run without the need to set ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   packages:
     gcc:
       externals:
       - spec: gcc@4.9.3
         prefix: /opt/gcc
         extra_attributes:
           compilers:
             c: /opt/gcc/bin/gcc
             cxx: /opt/gcc/bin/g++
             fortran: /opt/gcc/bin/gfortran
           extra_rpaths:
           - /path/to/some/compiler/runtime/directory
           - /path/to/some/other/compiler/runtime/directory

.. _compilers-requiring-modules:

---------------------------
Compilers Requiring Modules
---------------------------

> Many installed compilers will work regardless of the environment they are called with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many installed compilers will work regardless of the environment from which they are called.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   packages:
     gcc:
       externals:
       - spec: gcc@10.5.0 languages='c,c++,fortran'
         prefix: /opt/compilers
         extra_attributes:
           compilers:
             c: /opt/compilers/bin/gcc-10
             cxx: /opt/compilers/bin/g++-10
             fortran: /opt/compilers/bin/gfortran-10
         modules: [gcc/10.5.0]

Some compilers require special environment settings to be loaded not just
to run, but also to execute the code they build, breaking packages that
need to execute code they just compiled.  If it's not possible or
practical to use a better compiler, you'll need to ensure that
environment settings are preserved for compilers like this (i.e., you'll
need to load the module or source the compiler's shell script).

By default, Spack tries to ensure that builds are reproducible by
cleaning the environment before building.  If this interferes with your
compiler settings, you CAN use ``spack install --dirty`` as a workaround.
Note that this MAY interfere with package builds.

-----------------------
Build Your Own Compiler
-----------------------

> If you are particular about which compiler/version you use, you might wish to have Spack build it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you require a specific compiler and version, you can have Spack build it for you.
```
